Rewrite disaster recovery based on recreate and status check (#1890)
neo4j/docs-operations: modules/ROOT/pages/clustering/disaster-recovery.adoc

A database can become unavailable due to issues on different system levels.
For example, a data center failover may lead to the loss of multiple servers, which may cause a set of databases to become unavailable.

This section contains a step-by-step guide on how to recover *unavailable databases* that are incapable of serving writes, while possibly still being able to serve reads.
The guide recovers the unavailable databases and make them fully operational, with minimal impact on the other databases in the cluster.
However, if a database is not performing as expected for other reasons, this section cannot help.

[CAUTION]
====
If *all* servers in a Neo4j cluster are lost in a disaster, it is not possible to recover the current cluster.
You have to create a new cluster and restore the databases, see xref:clustering/setup/deploy.adoc[Deploy a basic cluster] and xref:clustering/databases.adoc#cluster-seed[Seed a database] for more information.
====

== Faults in clusters

> Databases in clusters follow an allocation strategy.

Author: "Databases in clusters may be allocated differently within the cluster and may also have different numbers of primaries and secondaries."

This means that they are allocated differently within the cluster and may also have different numbers of primaries and secondaries.
The consequence of this is that all servers may be different in which databases they are hosting.
Losing a server in a cluster may cause some databases to lose a member while others are unaffected.
Therefore, in a disaster where one or more servers go down, some databases may keep running with little to no impact, while others may lose all their allocated resources.

> == Guide structure

Author: "Overview of  the guide"? To make it more in line with other titles.

[NOTE]
====
In this guide, an _offline_ server is a server that is not running but may be restartable.

> A _lost_ server, however, is a server that is currently not running and cannot be restarted.

Author: Capital letter

> A _write available_ database is able to serve writes, while a _write unavailable_ database is not.

Author: Capital letter. What is the reason for not making capital letters here?

> A _write available_ database is able to serve writes, while a _write unavailable_ database is not.

Author: Yes capital letters

====

There are three main steps to recovering a cluster from a disaster.
First, ensure the `system` database is write available.
Then, detach any potential lost servers from the cluster and replace them by new ones.

> Finish disaster recovery by starting or continuing to manage databases and verify that they are write available.

Author: I added the list, but I don't think we should link to that part of the guide here. First of all, I think it promotes only jumping there and not considering the previous steps. Furthermore, since the others don't have similar links it makes it asymmetrical. I might add the links to all sections thought. What do you think?

> Finish disaster recovery by starting or continuing to manage databases and verify that they are write available.

Author: Now when I look at it, I'm wondering if it is strange to have it in list format and not mention the first step. Should I add the "Neo4j process started" section also in this overview?

> Finish disaster recovery by starting or continuing to manage databases and verify that they are write available.

Reviewer: Actually, I had the same question 🙂. But then I decided it was done on purpose. I mean, here you describe three steps of disaster recovery specifically. You cannot do anything without the Neo4j process started. This makes no sense to do anything without starting Neo4j. That's why this step is beyond the described steps of disaster recovery. That was my understanding.

> Finish disaster recovery by starting or continuing to manage databases and verify that they are write available.

Author: I think it is not important for understanding the overall flow, but what this step wants to cover is if you have a disaster where some process might have been stopped without the user meaning to.

> Finish disaster recovery by starting or continuing to manage databases and verify that they are write available.

Author: In that case we don't want them to e.g. get back that the system database is write unavailable just because they haven't checked this.

> Finish disaster recovery by starting or continuing to manage databases and verify that they are write available.

Reviewer: hmm, in this case there four steps:
1. Start the neo4j process on all stopped servers
2. make the 'system db write available
3. check the servers availability
4. make the databases write available again
Correct?

> Finish disaster recovery by starting or continuing to manage databases and verify that they are write available.

Author: Yes, maybe we should just add that in, even though the first step is very short. That is also how I presented it for field. I'll do that!

> Finish disaster recovery by starting or continuing to manage databases and verify that they are write available.

Author: With the links it will be more clear that this is an overview.

Every step consists of the following three sections:

. A state that the cluster needs to be in, with optional motivation.

> . An example of how the state can be verified.

Author: Does this make it seem too much like "this is the way to do it" rather than the softer suggestion?

> . An example of how the state can be verified.

Author: Verifying the state

. A proposed series of steps to get to the correct state.

[CAUTION]
====
Verifying each state before continuing to the next step, regardless of the disaster scenario, is recommended to ensure the cluster is fully operational.
====

== Guide to disaster recovery

[NOTE]
====
Disasters may sometimes affect the routing capabilities of the driver and may prevent the use of the `neo4j` scheme for routing.
One way to remedy this is to connect directly to the server using `bolt` instead of `neo4j`.
See xref:clustering/setup/routing.adoc#clustering-routing[Server-side routing] for more information on the `bolt` scheme.
====

=== Neo4j process started

==== Objective
====
The Neo4j process is started on all servers which are not _lost_.
====

==== Path to correct state
Start the Neo4j process on all servers that are _offline_.
If a server is unable to start, inspect the logs and contact support personnel.
The server may have to be considered indefinitely lost.

[[restore-the-system-database]]

> === `System` database write availability

Author: Lets discuss this one together with all other titles.

==== Objective
====
The `system` database is write available.
====

The `system` database contains the view of the cluster.
This includes which servers and databases are present, where they live and how they are configured.
During a disaster, the view of the cluster might need to change to reflect a new reality, for example by removing lost servers.
Databases might also need to be recreated to regain write availability.
Because both of these steps are executed by modifying the `system` database, making the `system` database write available is a vital first step during disaster recovery.

> ==== Example verification

Author: Verifying the state

Be aware that not replacing servers can cause cluster overload when databases are moved from lost servers to available ones in the next step of this guide.
=====
+
. On each server, run `bin/neo4j-admin database load system --from-path=[path-to-dump] --overwrite-destination=true` to load the current `system` database dump.
. On each server, ensure that the discovery settings are correct, see xref:clustering/setup/discovery.adoc[Cluster server discovery] for more information.
. Start the Neo4j process on all servers.
====

[[recover-servers]]
=== Server availability

==== Objective
====
All servers in the cluster's view are available and enabled.
====

A lost server will still be in the `system` database's view of the cluster, but in an unavailable state.
Furthermore, according to the view of the cluster, these lost servers are still hosting the databases they had before they became lost.
Therefore, informing the cluster of servers which are lost is not enough.
The databases hosted on lost servers also need to be moved onto available servers in the cluster, before the lost servers can be removed.

> ==== Example verification

Author: Verifying the state

The cluster's view of servers can be seen by listing the servers, see xref:clustering/servers.adoc#_listing_servers[Listing servers] for more information.
The state has been verified if *all* servers show `health` = `AVAILABLE` and `status` = `ENABLED`.

[source, cypher]
----
SHOW SERVERS;
----

==== Path to correct state
The following steps can be used to remove lost servers and add new ones to the cluster.

> To be able to remove lost servers, any allocations it should host needs to be moved to available servers in the cluster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be able to remove lost servers, any allocations it should host need to be moved to available servers in the cluster.
```

> This is done in two steps, first any databases that cannot move by themselves needs to be recreated so that they are forced to move.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is done in two steps:

. Any databases that cannot move by themselves must be recreated so that they are forced to move.
```

Author: databases -> allocations

> Then, any allocations that can move will be told to do so by deallocating the server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Any allocations that can move will be instructed to do so by deallocating the server.
```

If any database has `currentStatus` = `QUARANTINED` on an available server, recreate them from backup using xref:clustering/databases.adoc#uri-seed[Backup as seed].
+
[CAUTION]
=====
By using recreate with xref:clustering/databases.adoc#undefined-servers[Undefined servers] or xref:clustering/databases.adoc#undefined-servers-backup[Undefined servers with fallback backup], the store might not be recreated as up-to-date as possible in some edge cases where the system database has been restored.
=====

. For each `CORDONED` server, run `DEALLOCATE DATABASES FROM SERVER cordoned-server-id` on one of the available servers.
This will try to move all database allocations from this server to an available server in the cluster.
+
[NOTE]
=====
This operation might fail if enough unconstrained servers were not added to the cluster to replace lost servers.
Another reason is that some available servers are also `CORDONED`.
=====

. For each deallocating or deallocated server, run `DROP SERVER deallocated-server-id`.
This removes the server from the cluster's view.
====

[[recover-databases]]

> === Database availability

Author: I do not agree with inspect in this sections. If you have done some of the other steps before, this might mean you only need to inspect thing here. However, if no servers were lost this is actually your main step if recreating databases.

> === Database availability

Reviewer: This makes sense. I have not thought about this phase from your point of view, that it could be the main step in recovering the cluster.

> === Database availability

Author: Make databases write available

==== Objective
====
All databases which are desired to be started are write available.
====

Once this state is verified, disaster recovery is complete.
However, remember that previously stopped databases might have been started during this process.
If they are still desired to be in stopped state, run `STOP DATABASE started-db WAIT`.

[CAUTION]
====
Remember, recreating a database takes an unbounded amount of time since it may involve copying the store to a new server, as described in xref:clustering/databases.adoc#recreate-databases[Recreate databases].
Therefore, an allocation with `currentStatus` = `STARTING` will probably reach the `requestedStatus` given some time.
====

[[example-verification]]

> ==== Example verification

Author: Verifying the state

> All databases' write availability can be verified by using the xref:clustering/monitoring/status-check.adoc#monitoring-replication[Status check] procedure.

Author: all clustered databases'

[source, shell]
----
CALL dbms.cluster.statusCheck([]);
----

[NOTE]
=====

> The write availability of a database configured to have a single primary cannot be checked with the status check, instead check that the primary is allocated on an available server and that it has `currentStatus` = `STARTED`.

Author: Added "by running `SHOW DATABASES`." Also changed the same text in 2 more places so they match.

. A state that needs to be verified, with optional motivation.
. An example of how the state can be verified.
. A proposed series of steps to get to the correct state.

[CAUTION]
====
Verifying each state before continuing to the next step, regardless of the disaster scenario, is recommended to ensure the cluster is fully operational.
====

== Guide to disaster recovery

[NOTE]
====
Disasters may sometimes affect the routing capabilities of the driver and may prevent the use of the `neo4j` scheme for routing.
One way to remedy this is to connect directly to the server using `bolt` instead of `neo4j`.
See xref:clustering/setup/routing.adoc#clustering-routing[Server-side routing] for more information on the `bolt` scheme.
====

=== Neo4j process started

==== State
====
The Neo4j process is started on all servers which are not _lost_.
====

==== Path to correct state
Start the Neo4j process on all servers that are _offline_.
If a server is unable to start, inspect the logs and contact support personnel.
The server may have to be considered indefinitely lost.

[[restore-the-system-database]]
=== `System` database write availability

> 

Reviewer 2: This section is empty. Don't know if it's intentional because we're listing sth :/

==== State
====
The `system` database is write available.
====

The `system` database contains the view of the cluster.
This includes which servers and databases are present, where they live and how they are configured.
During a disaster, the view of the cluster might need to change to reflect a new reality, for example by removing lost servers.
Databases might also need to be recreated to regain write availability.
Because both of these steps are executed by modifying the `system` database, making the `system` database write available is a vital first step during disaster recovery.

==== Example verification
The `system` database's write availability can be verified by using the xref:clustering/monitoring/status-check.adoc#monitoring-replication[Status check] procedure.

> The procedure should be called on all remaining primary allocations of the `system` database, in order to provide the correct view.

Author: Good point, I'll leave it out here and a more throughout explanation can be in the status check docs.

The default timeout for the procedure is 1 second, but depending on the network latency in the environment it might need to be extended to produce an accurate result.
If any of the primary `system` allocations report `replicationSuccessful` = `TRUE`, the `system` database is write available.
Therefore, the desired state has been verified.

[source, shell]
----
CALL dbms.cluster.statusCheck(["system"]);
----

[NOTE]
=====
The write availability of a database configured to have a single primary cannot be checked with the status check, instead check that the primary is allocated on an available server and that it has `currentStatus` = `STARTED`.

> The procedure will still produce an accurate result if all but one primary have been lost during a disaster.

Author: I wanted to explain that even though it does not work for a standalone, it will still work for a clustered database which has only one allocation left. But that might be too much, I'll just remove it.

It is important to get a `system` database that is as up-to-date as possible, so it corresponds to the view before the disaster closely.

.Guide
[%collapsible]
====

[NOTE]
=====
This section of the disaster recovery guide uses `neo4j-admin`, for more information about the used commands, see xref:tools/neo4j-admin/index.adoc#neo4j-admin-commands[neo4j-admin commands].
=====

. Shut down the Neo4j process on all servers.
This causes downtime for all databases in the cluster until the processes are started again at the end of this section.
. On each server, run `bin/neo4j-admin dbms unbind-system-db` to reset the `system` database state on the servers.
. On each server, run `bin/neo4j-admin database info system` and compare the `lastCommittedTransaction` to find out which server has the most up-to-date copy of the `system` database.
. On the most up-to-date server, run `bin/neo4j-admin database dump system --to-path=[path-to-dump]` to take a dump of the current `system` database and store it in an accessible location.
. For every _lost_ server, add a new *unconstrained* one according to xref:clustering/servers.adoc#cluster-add-server[Add a server to the cluster].

> It is important that the new servers are unconstrained, or deallocating servers in the next step of this guide might be blocked, even though enough servers were added.

Author: I don't think that adds very much without an explanation on how to go about doing that. And since I don't think that belong here I'll leave it as is.

. Start the Neo4j process on all servers.
====

[[recover-servers]]
=== Server availability

==== State
====
All servers in the cluster's view are available and enabled.
====

A lost server will still be in the `system` database's view of the cluster, but in an unavailable state.
Furthermore, according to the view of the cluster, these lost servers are still hosting the databases they had before they became lost.
Therefore, informing the cluster of servers which are lost is not enough.
The databases hosted on lost servers also need to be moved onto available servers in the cluster, before the lost servers can be removed.

==== Example verification
The cluster's view of servers can be seen by listing the servers, see xref:clustering/servers.adoc#_listing_servers[Listing servers] for more information.
The state has been verified if *all* servers show `health` = `AVAILABLE` and `status` = `ENABLED`.

[source, cypher]
----
SHOW SERVERS;
----

==== Path to correct state
The following steps can be used to remove lost servers and add new ones to the cluster.
That includes moving any potential database allocations from lost servers to available servers.

> These steps might also recreate some databases, since a database which has lost a majority of its primary allocations cannot be moved from one server to another.

Author: Right, a database can still have a quorum left, but have some quarantined allocations. I'll clarify this and the overall goal of the steps.

.Guide
[%collapsible]
====
. For each `UNAVAILABLE` server, run `CALL dbms.cluster.cordonServer("unavailable-server-id")` on one of the available servers.
This prevents new database allocations from being moved to this server.
. For each `CORDONED` server, make sure a new *unconstrained* server has been added to the cluster to take its place, see xref:clustering/servers.adoc#cluster-add-server[Add a server to the cluster] for more information.
If servers were added in the 'System database write availability' step of this guide, additional servers might not be needed here.
It is important that the new servers are unconstrained, or deallocating servers might be blocked even though enough servers were added.
+
[NOTE]
=====
While recommended, it is not strictly necessary to add new servers in this step.
However, not adding new servers reduces the capacity of the cluster to handle work.
Furthermore, it might require the topology for a database to be altered to make deallocating servers and recreating databases possible.
=====

> . For each stopped database (`currentStatus`= `offline`), start them by running `START DATABASE stopped-db`.

Author: We said that since we recommend using the status check procedure to find out which databases are write unavailable, we would also recommend all stopped databases being started so that it gives the correct result. The next sentence describes the moving part "This is necessary since stopped databases cannot be moved from one server to another." I will change moved from one server to another. -> deallocated from a server. And also add a comment on how this interacts with status check.

> . For each stopped database (`currentStatus`= `offline`), start them by running `START DATABASE stopped-db`.

Author: I agree that this is good context to give, however, I don't think it belongs in this section since it would then describe the overall goal in the middle of the steps to reach that goal. I have added some sentences to the beginning of the steps to try and explain this. There is a comment there as well, so I'll try to clarify the motivation there.

=== Start the Neo4j process

==== Objective

====
The Neo4j process is started on all servers that are not _lost_.
====

==== Path to correct state

Start the Neo4j process on all servers that are _offline_.
If a server is unable to start, inspect the logs and contact support personnel.
The server may have to be considered indefinitely lost.

[[make-the-system-database-write-available]]
=== Make the `system` database write-available

==== Objective
====
The `system` database is able to accept write operations.
====

The `system` database contains the view of the cluster.
This includes which servers and databases are present, where they live and how they are configured.
During a disaster, the view of the cluster might need to change to reflect a new reality, such as removing lost servers.
Databases might also need to be recreated to regain write availability.

> Because both of these steps are executed by modifying the `system` database, making the `system` database write-enabled is a vital first step during disaster recovery.

Author: This is in your hands, but I don't think it nice to change from a technically correct wording which we have defined in the beginning of the document to multiple adjacent ones which are not defined. Like write-enabled, able to accept write operations and write-capable.

----

==== Path to correct state
Use the following steps to remove lost servers and add new ones to the cluster.
To remove lost servers, any allocations they were hosting must be moved to available servers in the cluster.

> This can be done in two different ways:

Author: This is not correct, it is not an either or, but both will be needed in most cases.
